Level-1 Term-II

CSE 103 Discrete Mathematics
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Set theory; Relations; Functions; Graph theory; Propositional calculus
and predicate calculus; Mathematical reasoning: induction, contradiction
and recursion; counting; Principles of inclusion and exclusion; Recurrence
relations; Algebraic structures: rings and groups.

CSE 105 Structured Programming Language
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Structured programming language: data types, operators, expressions, control
structures; Functions and program structure: parameter passing conventions,
scope rules and storage classes, recursion; Header files; Preprocessor;
Pointers and arrays; Strings; Multidimensional array; User defined data
types: structures, unions, enumerations; Input and Output: standard input
and output, formatted input and output, file access; Variable length argument
list; Command line parameters; Error Handling; Graphics; Linking; Library
functions.
Reference language: C

CSE 106 Structured Programming Language
Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 105.

CHEM 101 Chemistry
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Atomic structure, quantum numbers, electronic configuration, periodic table;
Properties and uses of noble gases; Different types of chemical bonds
and their properties; Molecular structure of compounds; Selective organic
reactions; Different types of solutions and their compositions; Phase rule,
phase diagram of monocomponent system; Properties of dilute solutions;
Thermochemistry, chemical kinetics, chemical equilibria; Ionization of water
and pH concept; Electrical properties of Solution.

CHEM 114 Inorganic Quantitative Analysis
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Volumetric analysis: acid-base titration, oxidation-reduction titration,
determination of Fe, Cu, Ca volumetrically.

HUM 175 English
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
English phonetics: the places and manners of articulation of the English
sounds; Vocabulary; English grammar: construction of sentences, some
grammatical problems; Comprehension; Paragraph writing; Precis writing;
Amplification; Report writing; Business communication and tenders; Short
stories written by some well-known classic writers.

HUM 272 Developing English Skills Laboratory
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Grammar: Tense, article, preposition, subject-verb agreement, clause,
conditional and sentence structure.
Vocabulary building: Correct and precise diction, affixes, level of
appropriateness. Colloquial and standard, informal and formal.
Developing reading skill: Strategies of reading - skimming, scanning,
predicting, inferring; analyzing and interpreting variety of texts; practicing
comprehension from literary and nonliterary texts.
Developing writing skill: Sentences, sentence variety, generating sentences;
clarity and correctness of sentences, linking sentences to form paragraphs,
writing paragraphs, essays, reports, formal and informal letters. Listening
skill and note taking: Listening to recorded texts and class lectures and
learning to take useful notes based on listening.
Developing speaking skill: Oral skills including communicative expressions
for personal identification, life at home, giving advice and opinion, instruction
and directions, requests, complaints, apologies, describing people and places,
narrating events.

MATH 143 Integral Calculus, Ordinary and
Partial Differential Equations, and Series
Solutions
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Integral Calculus: Definitions of integration; Integration by the method
of substitutions; Integration by parts; Standard integrals; Integration by the
method of successive reduction; Definite integrals and its properties and
use in summing series; Walli’s formula, Improper integrals, Beta function
and Gamma function; Area under a plane curve in cartesian and polar
co-ordinates; Area of the region enclosed by two curves in cartesian and
polar co-ordinates; Trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s rule; Arc lengths of curves
in cartesian and polar co-ordinates, parametric and pedal equations; Intrinsic
equation; Volume of solids of revolution; Volume of hollow solids of
revolution by shell method. Area of surface of revolution; Jacobian, multiple
integrals and their application.
Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE): Degree and order of ordinary
differential equations; Formation of differential equations; Solution of first
order differential equations by various methods; Solution of first order but
higher degree ordinary differential equations; Solution of general linear
equations of second and higher orders with constant coefficients; Solution of
homogeneous linear equations and its applications; Solution of differential
equations of higher order when dependent and independent variables are
absent; Solution of differential equation by the method based on factorization
of operators.
Partial Differential Equations (PDE): Four rules for solving simultaneous
equations of the form dx/P = dy/Q = dz/R ; Lagrange’s method of solving PDE
of order one; Integral surfaces passing through a given curve; Nonlinear PDE
of order one (complete, particular, singular and general integrals): standard
forms f(p; q) = 0, z = px+qy+f(p; q), f(p; q; z) = 0, f1(x; p) = f2(y; q);
Charpit’s method; Second order PDE: its nomenclature and classifications to
canonical (standard)- parabolic, elliptic, hyperbolic; Solution by separation
of variables; Linear PDE with constant coefficients.
Series Solution: Solution of differential equations in series by the method of
Frobenius; Bessel’s functions, Legendre’s polynomials and their properties.