Level-1 Term-I

CSE 100 Introduction to Computer Systems
4 hours in a week, 2.00 Cr.
Introduction to computations; Early history of computing devices;
Computers; Major components of a computer; Hardware: processor,
memory, I/O devices; Software: Operating system, application software;
Basic architecture of a computer; Basic Information Technology; The
Internet; Number system: binary, octal, hexadecimal, binary arithmetic;
Basic programming concepts; Program development stages: flow charts;
Programming constructs: data types, operators, expressions, statements,
control statements, functions, array.

EEE 163 Introduction to Electrical Engineering
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Fundamental electrical concepts and measuring units; Direct current: voltage,
current, resistance and power; Laws of electrical circuits and methods of
network analysis; Introduction to magnetic circuits; Alternating current:
instantaneous and r.m.s. current, voltage and power, average power for
various combinations of R, L and C circuits, phasor representation of
sinusoidal quantities.

EEE 164 Introduction to Electrical Engineering
Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on EEE 163.

MATH 141 Differential Calculus and Co-ordinate
Geometry
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Differential Calculus: Limits, continuity and differentiability; Successive
differentiation of various types of functions; Leibniz’s Theorem; Rolle’s
Theorem; Mean value Theorem in finite and infinite forms; Lagrange’s
form of remainders; Cauchy’s form of remainder; Expansion of
functions; Evaluation of indeterminate forms by L’Hospital’s rule; Partial
differentiation; Euler’s Theorem; Tangent and Normal, Subtangent and
subnormal in cartesian and polar co-ordinates; Maximum and minimum
values of functions of single variable; Points of inflexion; Curvature, radius
of curvature, center of curvature; Asymptotes, curve tracing.
Co-ordinate Geometry: Transformation of co-ordinates axes and its uses;
Equation of conics and its reduction to standard forms; Pair of straight
lines; Homogeneous equations of second degree; Angle between a pair of
straight lines; Pair of lines joining the origin to the point of intersection of
two given curves, circles; System of circles; Orthogonal circles; Radical
axis, radical center, properties of radical axes; Coaxial circles and limiting
points; Equations of parabola, ellipse and hyperbola in cartesian and polar
co-ordinates; Tangents and normals, pair of tangents; Chord of contact;
Chord in terms of its middle points; Pole and polar parametric co-ordinates;
Diameters; Conjugate diameters and their properties; Director circles and
asymptotes.

ME 160 Mechanical Engineering Drawing-I
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Introduction; Instruments and their uses; First and third angle projections;
Orthographic drawings; Isometric views; Missing lines and views; Sectional
views and conventional practices; Auxiliary views.

ME 165 Basic Mechanical Engineering
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Sources of energy: conventional and renewable; Introduction to IC engines,
Refrigeration and Air conditioning systems. Statics of particles and rigid
bodies; Forces in trusses and frames; Relative motion; Kinematics of
particles: Newton’s Second Law of Motion; Kinematics of rigid bodies.
Introduction to Robotics; Plane, rotational and spatial motion with
applications to manipulators; Geometric configurations: structural elements,
linkage, arms and grippers; Motion characteristics.

PHY 109 Physics (Heat and Thermodynamics,
Structure of Matter, Waves and Oscillations, and
Physical Optics)
4 hours in a week, 4.00 Cr.
Heat and Thermodynamics: Principle of temperature measurements:
platinum resistance thermometer, thermo-electric thermometer, pyrometer;
Kinetic theory of gases: Maxwell’s distribution of molecular speeds, mean
free path, equipartition of energy, Brownian motion, Van der Waal’s equation
of state, review of the First Law of thermodynamics and its application,
reversible and irreversible processes, Second Law of thermodynamics, Carnot
cycle; Efficiency of heat engines, Carnot’s Theorem, entropy and disorder,
thermodynamic functions, Maxwell relations, Clausius-Clapeyron Equation,
Gibbs Phase Rule, Third Law of thermodynamics.
Structure of Matter: Crystalline and non-crystalline solids, single crystal
and polycrystal solids, unit cell, crystal systems, co-ordinations number,
crystal planes and directions, sodium chloride and CsCl structure, packing
factor, Miller indices, relation between interplanar spacing and Miller
indices, Bragg’s Law, methods of determination of interplanar spacing from
diffraction patterns; Defects in solids: point defects, line defects; Bonds in
solids, inter-atomic distances, calculation of cohesive and bonding energy;
Introduction to band theory: distinction between metal, semiconductor and
insulator.
Waves and Oscillations: Differential equation of a simple harmonic
oscillator, total energy and average energy, combination of simple harmonic
oscillations, Lissajous’ figures, spring-mass system, calculation of time
period of torsional pendulum, damped oscillation, determination of damping
co-efficient, forced oscillation, resonance, two-body oscillations, Reduced
mass, differential equation of a progressive wave, power and intensity of wave
motion, stationary wave, group velocity and phase velocity, architectural
acoustics, reverberation and Sabine’s formula.
Physical Optics: Theories of light; Interference of light, Young’s double
slit experiment; Displacements of fringes and its uses; Fresnel Bi-prism,
interference at wedge shaped films, Newton’s rings, interferometers;
Diffraction of light: Fresnel and Fraunhoffer diffraction, diffraction
by single slit, diffraction from a circular aperture, resolving power of
optical instruments, diffraction at double slit & N-slits-diffraction grating;
Polarization: production and analysis of polarized light, Brewster’s law,
Malus law, Polarization by double refraction, retardation plates, Nicol prism,
optical activity, polarimeters, polaroid.

PHY 102 Physics Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on PHY 109.