Level-2 Term-I

CSE 201 Object Oriented Programming Language
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Philosophy of Object Oriented Programming (OOP); Advantages of OOP
over structured programming; Encapsulation, classes and objects, access
specifiers, static and non-static members; Constructors, destructors and
copy constructors; Array of objects, object pointers, and object references;
Inheritance: single and multiple inheritance; Polymorphism: overloading,
abstract classes, virtual functions and overriding; Exceptions; Object
Oriented I/O; Template functions and classes; Multi-threaded Programming.
Reference languages: C++ and Java.

CSE 202 Object Oriented Programming
Language Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 201.

CSE 203 Data Structures
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Internal data representation; Abstract data types; Elementary data structures:
arrays, lists, stacks, queues, trees, graphs; Advanced data Structures: heaps,
Fibonacci heaps, B-trees; Recursion, sorting, searching, hashing, storage
management.

CSE 204 Data Structures Sessional
3 hours in alternate week, 0.75 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 203.

CSE 205 Digital Logic Design
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Digital logic: Boolean algebra, De Morgan’s Theorems, logic gates and
their truth tables, canonical forms, combinational logic circuits, minimization
techniques; Arithmetic and data handling logic circuits, decoders and
encoders, multiplexers and demultiplexers; Combinational circuit design;
Flip-flops, race around problems; Counters: asynchronous counters,
synchronous counters and their applications; PLA design; Synchronous and
asynchronous logic design; State diagram, Mealy and Moore machines;
State minimizations and assignments; Pulse mode logic; Fundamental mode
design.

CSE 206 Digital Logic Design Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 205.

EEE 263 Electronic Devices and Circuits
4 hours in a week, 4.00 Cr.
Introduction to semiconductors, p-type and n-type semiconductors; p-n
junction diode characteristics; Diode applications: half and full wave
rectifiers, clipping and clamping circuits, regulated power supply using zener
diode.
Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT): principle of operation, I-V characteristics;
Transistor circuit configurations (CE, CB, CC), BJT biasing, load lines; BJTs
at low frequencies; Hybrid model, h parameters, simplified hybrid model;
Small-signal analysis of single and multi-stage amplifiers, frequency response
of BJT amplifier; Field Effect Transistors (FET): principle of operation of
JFET and MOSFET; Depletion and enhancement type NMOS and PMOS;
biasing of FETs; Low and high frequency models of FETs, Switching circuits
using FETs; Introduction to CMOS.
Operational Amplifiers (OPAMP): linear applications of OPAMPs, gain,
input and output impedances, active filters, frequency response and noise.
Introduction to feedback, Oscillators, Silicon Controlled Rectifiers (SCR),
TRIAC, DIAC and UJT: characteristics and applications; Introduction to IC
fabrication processes.

EEE 264 Electronic Devices and Circuits Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on EEE 263

MATH 241 Complex Variable and Statistics
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Complex Variable: Complex number system; General functions of a
complex variable; Limits and continuity of a function of complex variable
and related theorems; Complex differentiation and the Cauchy-Riemann
Equations; Mapping by elementary functions; Line integral of a complex
function; Cauchy’s Integral Theorem; Cauchy’s Integral Formula; Liouville’s
Theorem; Taylor’s Theorem and Laurent’s Theorem. Singular points;
Residue; Cauchy’s Residue Theorem. Evaluation of residues; Contour
integration; Conformal mapping.
Statistics: Frequency distribution; Mean, median, mode and other measures
of central tendency; Standard deviation and other measures of dispersion;
Moments, skewness and kurtosis; Elementary probability theory and
discontinuous probability distribution, (binomial, Poisson and negative
binomial); Characteristics of distributions; Elementary sampling theory;
Estimation; Hypothesis testing and regression analysis.