Level-2 Term-II

CSE 207 Algorithms
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Techniques for analysis of algorithms; Methods for the design of efficient
algorithms: divide and conquer, greedy method, dynamic programming,
back tracking, branch and bound; Basic search and traversal techniques;
Topological sorting; Connected components, spanning trees, shortest paths;
Flow algorithms; Approximation algorithms; Parallel algorithms; Algebraic
simplification and transformations; Lower bound theory; NP-completeness,
NP-hard and NP-complete problems.

CSE 208 Algorithms Sessional
3 hours in alternate week, 0.75 Cr.
Laboratory work based on CSE 207.

CSE 209 Digital Electronics and Pulse Techniques
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Diode logic gates, transistor switches, transistor gates, MOS gates; Logic
Families: TTL, ECL, IIL and CMOS logic with operation details;
Propagation delay, product and noise immunity; Open collector and high
impedance gates; Electronic circuits for flip-flops, counters and register,
memory systems, PLAs; A/D and D/A converters with applications; S/H
circuits, LED, LCD and optically coupled oscillators; Non-linear applications
of OP AMPs; Analog switches. Linear wave shaping: diode wave
shaping techniques, clipping and clamping circuits, comparator circuits,
switching circuits; Pulse transformers, pulse transmission, pulse generation;
monostable, bistable and astable multivibrators, Schmitt trigger, blocking
oscillators and time-base circuit; Timing circuits; Simple voltage sweeps,
linear current sweeps.

CSE 210 Digital Electronics and Pulse Techniques
Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 209.

CSE 211 Theory of Computation
2 hours in a week, 2.00 Cr.
Language theory; Finite automata: deterministic finite automata,
nondeterministic finite automata, equivalence and conversion of deterministic
and nondeterministic finite automata, pushdown automata; Context free
languages; Context free grammars; Turing Machines: basic machines,
configuration, computing with Turing machines, combining Turing
machines; Undecidability.

CSE 214 Assembly Language Programming
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Hardware architecture and software architecture; Instruction types and their
formats; Assembly program format; Assembly process; Interrupts and system
services; Addressing methods; High level control structure formation; Use
of subroutines and macros; Numeric processing and string processing;
Concurrent processes and high level linking; Disk geometry, file system and
file I/O handling.

EEE 269 Electrical Drives and Instrumentation
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Introduction to three phase circuits, alternators and transformers; Principles
of operation of DC, synchronous, induction, universal, and stepper motors;
Thyristor and microprocessor based speed control of motors.
Instrumentation amplifiers: differential, logarithmic and chopper amplifiers;
Frequency and voltage measurements using digital techniques; Recorders
and display devices, spectrum analyzers and logic analyzers; Data
acquisition and interfacing to microprocessor based systems; Transducers:
terminology, types, principles and application of photovoltaic, piezoelectric,
thermoelectric, variable reactance and opto-electronic transducers; Noise
reduction in instrumentation.

EEE 270 Electrical Drives and Instrumentation
Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on EEE 269.

MATH 243 Matrices, Vectors, Fourier Analysis,
and Laplace Transforms
4 hours in a week, 4.00 Cr.
Matrices: Definition of matrix; Different types of matrices; Algebra of
matrices; Adjoint and inverse of a matrix; Elementary transformations of
matrices; Matrix polynomials; Calay-Hamilton theory with uses of rank
and nullity; Normal and canonical forms; Solution of linear equations;
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Vector Spaces: Definition and properties, subspaces, basis and dimension,
change of basis; Linear Transformation (LT): definition and properties, linear
operator matrix, geometry of LT, standard plane LT.
Vector Algebra: Scalars and vectors, equality of vectors; Addition and
subtraction of vectors; Multiplication of vectors by scalars; Scalar and vector
product of two vectors and their geometrical interpretation; Triple products
ce of vectors.
Vector Calculus: Differentiation and integration of vectors together with
elementary applications; Definition of line, surface and volume integrals;
Gradient, divergence and curl of point functions, various formulae, Gauss’s
theorem, Stoke’s theorem, Green’s theorem.
Fourier Analysis: Real and complex form of Fourier series; Finite transform;
Fourier Integral; Fourier transforms and their uses in solving boundary value
problems of wave equations.
Laplace Transforms: Definition; Laplace transforms of some elementary
functions; Sufficient conditions for existence of Laplace transforms; Inverse
Laplace transforms; Laplace transforms of derivatives. The unit step
function; Periodic function; Some special theorems on Laplace transforms;
Partial fraction; Solutions of differential equations by Laplace transforms;
Evaluation of improper integrals.