Level-4 Term-I

CSE 400 Project and Thesis
6 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Study of problems in the field of Computer Science and Engineering.

CSE 401 Artificial Intelligence
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Introduction to old and new AI techniques; Knowledge representation;
Propositional and first order logic, inference in first order logic; Frame
problem; Search techniques in AI; Game playing; Planning; Probabilistic
reasoning; Learning in symbolic and non-symbolic representation; Natural
language processing. Introduction to expert system.

CSE 402 Artificial Intelligence Sessional
3 hours in alternate week, 0.75 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 401.

CSE 403 Digital System Design
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Designing I/O system; I/O devices; Designing Microprocessor based system
with interfacing chips; Programmable peripheral interface (interface to
A/D and D/A converter); Keyboard/display interface; Programmable timer;
Programmable interrupt controller, DMA controller; Design using MSI and
LSI components; Design of memory subsystem using SRAM and DRAM;
Design of various components of a computer: ALU, memory and control
unit - hardwired and micro programmed; Microprocessor based designs;
Computer BUS standards; Design special purpose controllers.

CSE 404 Digital System Design Sessional
3 hours in a week, 1.50 Cr.
Laboratory works based on CSE 403.

IPE 493 Industrial Management
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Introduction, evolution, management function, organization and
environment.
Organization: Theory and structure; Coordination; Span of control;
Authority delegation; Groups; Committee and task force; Manpower
planning.
Personnel Management: Scope; Importance; Need hierarchy; Motivation;
Job redesign; Leadership; Participative management; Training; Performance
appraisal; Wages and incentives; Informal groups; Organizational change
and conflict.
Cost and Financial Management: Elements of costs of products
depreciation; Break-even analysis; Investment analysis; Benefit cost analysis.
Management Accounting: Cost planning and control; Budget and budgetary
control; Development planning process.
Marketing Management: Concepts; Strategy; Sales promotion; Patent
laws.
Technology Management: Management of innovation and changes;
Technology life cycle; Case studies.

CSE 411 Simulation and Modeling
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Simulation modeling basics: systems, models and simulation; Classification
of simulation models; Steps in a simulation study; Concepts in discrete-event
simulation: event-scheduling vs. process- interaction approaches,
time-advance mechanism, organization of a discrete-event simulation model;
Continuous simulation models; Combined discreet-continuous models;
Monte Carlo simulation; Simulation of queuing systems. Building valid and
credible simulation models: validation principles and techniques, statistical
procedures for comparing real-world observations and simulated outputs,
input modeling; Generating random numbers and random variates; Output
analysis. Simulation languages; Analysis and modeling of some practical
systems.

CSE 421 Basic Graph Theory
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Graphs: simple graphs, digraphs, subgraphs, vertex-degrees, walks, paths and
cycles; Trees, spanning trees in graphs, distance in graphs; Complementary
graphs, cut-vertices, bridges and blocks, k-connected graphs; Euler tours,
Hamiltonian cycles, Chinese Postman Problem, Traveling Salesman Problem;
Chromatic number, chromatic polynomials, chromatic index, Vizing’s
theorem, planar graphs, perfect graphs.

CSE 423 Fault Tolerant Systems
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Introduction of Fault Tolerant Systems and architectures; Fault detection and
location in combinational and sequential circuits; Fault test generation for
combinational and sequential circuits; Digital simulation as a diagnostic tool;
Automatic test pattern generator; Fault modeling; Automatic test equipment,
faults in memory, memory test pattern and reliability; Performance
monitoring, self checking circuits, burst error correction and triple modular
redundancy; Maintenance processors.

CSE 433 Digital Image Processing
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Introduction; Digitization of images and its properties; Data structures
for image analysis; Image processing; Segmentation: detection of
discontinuities, edge linking and boundary detection, thresholding, region
oriented segmentation, use of motion in segmentation; Image transforms:
Z-transform, 2D Fourier transform, discrete cosine transform, Hadamard
transform, Walsh transform, Slant transform; Image compression: run-length
coding, transform coding, standards.

CSE 435 Basic Multimedia Theory
3 hours in a week, 3.00 Cr.
Multimedia systems - introduction; Coding and compression standards;
Architecture issues in multimedia; Operating systems issues in multimedia
- real-time OS issues, synchronization, interrupt handling; Database issues
in multimedia - indexing and storing multimedia data, disk placement,
disk scheduling, searching for a multimedia document; Networking issues
in multimedia - Quality-of-service guarantees, resource reservation, traffic
specification, shaping, and monitoring, admission control; Multicasting
issues; Session directories; Protocols for controlling sessions; Security issues
in multimedia - digital water- marking, partial encryption schemes for video
streams; Multimedia applications - audio and video conferencing, video on
demand, voice over IP.

HUM 211 Sociology
2 hours in a week, 2.00 Cr.
Sociological perspective: definition, nature, scope and importance of
sociology; Sociology and scientific approach: methods of social research,
stages of social research; Primary concepts of sociology: society, community,
association, institution, group; Social evolution: stages in the evolution
of human civilization; Culture: definition, characteristics, culture contents
(material and non-material), cultural lag, culture and civilization; Industrial
revolution: the growth of capitalism, features and social consequences,
socialism; Social organization: family, forms and functions of family,
functions of family in modern industrial society, marriage, forms of
marriage, functions of marriage; Social stratification: main types of social
stratification - slavery-caste and social class and status, social stratification
and social mobility; Social control: religion and morality, custom and
public opinion, taboo-law, state and education; Social change: changeevolution-
progress-development, factors in social change; Society and
population: human migration, population and resources; Some current social
problems: crime, deviance, juvenile delinquency, youth unrest; Technology
and society: effects of technological factors on social life.

HUM 213 Government
2 hours in a week, 2.00 Cr.
Some basic concepts of government and politics; Functions, organs and forms
of modern state and government; Socialism, Fascism, Marxism. Government
and politics of Bangladesh; Some major administrative systems of developed
countries; Local self government; Some major aspects of international
politics.

HUM 411 Business Law
2 hours in a week, 2.00 Cr.
Principles of law of contracts; Company law: law regarding formation,
incorporation, management and winding up of companies; Labor law: law
in relation to wages hours, health, safety and other condition to work; The
trade union legislation arbitration, the policy of the state in relation to labor;
The Factory Act (1965); The Law of compensation (1965).